.TH KITTY-LAUNCHER 1 "April 2026" "kitty-launcher 0.5.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
kitty-launcher \- Robust wrapper for launching kitty terminal sessions

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B kitty-launcher
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fICOMMAND\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B kitty-launcher
is a robust Rust wrapper for the kitty terminal emulator that allows launching
terminal sessions with flexible configuration presets. It provides a convenient
way to start preconfigured terminal environments with custom layouts, working
directories, and applications.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Display this help message and exit.

.TP
.B \-V, \-\-version
Display version information and exit.

.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B <SESSION_NAME>
Launch a kitty session using the specified session name. The program searches for
configuration files in the following order:
.RS
.IP 1. 3
./kitty/sessions/ (current directory, highest priority)
.IP 2. 3
~/.local/etc/kitty/sessions/ (user home directory)
.IP 3. 3
/opt/etc/kitty/sessions/ (optional system-wide)
.IP 4. 3
~/.config/kitty/sessions/ (kitty standard location, lowest priority)
.RE

If the session name doesn't already end with
.B .session
extension, the program will first try to find the file as-is, then retry with
.B .session
extension appended.

.TP
.B \-c, \-\-create <NAME>
Create a new session configuration file. The program will:
.RS
.IP 1. 3
Create the ~/.local/etc/kitty/sessions/ directory if it doesn't exist
.IP 2. 3
Copy the z-tools.session template file (if it exists)
.IP 3. 3
Create a new file named <NAME>.session in ~/.local/etc/kitty/sessions/
.RE

If no template file is available, a basic template will be created. The created
file can then be edited to customize the session configuration.

.TP
.B \-l, \-\-create-launcher <LAUNCHER_NAME> [SESSION_NAME]
Create a .desktop launcher file for launching a session.
The program will:
.RS
.IP 1. 3
Create the ~/.local/etc/kitty/launchers/ directory if it doesn't exist
.IP 2. 3
Generate a standard .desktop file named kitty-launcher-<LAUNCHER_NAME>.desktop
.IP 3. 3
Save the .desktop file in the launchers directory
.RE

The created .desktop file is stored locally for organization. If SESSION_NAME is
omitted, LAUNCHER_NAME is used as the session. To expose a launcher to the
application menu, use the --install command.

.TP
.B \-\-path <DIRECTORY>
(Used with -l/--create-launcher) Set the working directory for the launcher.
When specified, the .desktop file will include a working directory path, causing
the launcher to start in that directory. This enables finding local sessions
stored in ./kitty/sessions/ when launching graphically from the desktop.

Example: kitty-launcher -l "Project" dev --path ~/myproject

This allows graphical launching of project-specific terminal environments.

.TP
.B \-\-install <LAUNCHER_NAME>
Add a launcher to the application menu by creating a symlink to
~/.local/share/applications/. This enables the launcher to appear in your
desktop environment's application menu without cluttering the launchers
directory. You may need to refresh your desktop environment for changes to
take effect.

.SH SESSION SEARCH BEHAVIOR
The program implements smart session file discovery with the following features:

.TP
.B Extension Auto-appending
If a session name doesn't end with
.B .session
extension, the program will first search for the exact name, then retry with
.B .session
appended. For example, searching for "dev" will try:
.RS
.IP • 3
dev (exact match)
.IP • 3
dev.session (with extension)
.RE

.TP
.B Absolute Path Resolution
On success, the program prints the absolute path to the resolved configuration
file, allowing users to verify which configuration was loaded.

.TP
.B Detailed Error Reporting
On failure, the program lists all attempted file paths (in order of search
priority), making debugging configuration issues much easier.

.SH SESSION NAME VALIDATION
Session names must follow these rules:
.IP • 3
Must not be empty
.IP • 3
Can contain alphanumeric characters, hyphens (\-), underscores (_), and dots (.)
.IP • 3
Cannot contain path separators (/ or \e)
.IP • 3
Cannot be special directory names (. or ..)
.IP • 3
Cannot contain special characters (@, #, $, etc.)

Examples of valid session names:
.RS
dev, work-session, project_v1, dev.backup, z-tools.session
.RE

Examples of invalid session names:
.RS
../evil, /root, dev/session, dev@home
.RE

.SH SESSION FILE FORMAT
Session files use the kitty session configuration format. For complete documentation,
see the kitty documentation at https://sw.kovidgoyal.net/kitty/conf/

Basic example of a session file:
.RS
.nf
# Define the first tab
new_tab Main
  cd /path/to/project
  launch

# Define the second tab
new_tab Development
  launch
.fi
.RE

.SH CONFIGURATION FILE CREATION
When creating a new session with
.B \-\-create
option, the program uses z-tools.session as a template. This template should be
located at ~/.local/etc/kitty/sessions/z-tools.session. If no template exists, a basic
template will be used.

To customize the template:
.IP 1. 3
Edit ~/.local/etc/kitty/sessions/z-tools.session
.IP 2. 3
Run
.B kitty-launcher \-\-create <name>
to create new sessions based on your customized template

.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution (session launched or file created successfully)

.TP
.B 1
Runtime error (e.g., kitty not found, failed to launch terminal)

.TP
.B 2
Configuration error (e.g., invalid session name, config file not found)

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Launch a session named "dev":
.B kitty-launcher dev

.TP
Launch a session with explicit .session extension:
.B kitty-launcher dev.session

.TP
Create a new session configuration file (short form):
.B kitty-launcher -c my-project

.TP
Create a new session configuration file (long form):
.B kitty-launcher --create my-project

.TP
Create a launcher for the dev session (short form):
.B kitty-launcher -l dev dev

.TP
Create a launcher where launcher name is the session (short form):
.B kitty-launcher -l myapp

.TP
Create a launcher for the dev session (long form):
.B kitty-launcher --create-launcher dev dev

.TP
Create a launcher with working directory for local sessions:
.B kitty-launcher -l "Project" dev --path ~/myproject

.TP
Display help message (short form):
.B kitty-launcher -h

.TP
Display help message (long form):
.B kitty-launcher --help

.TP
Display version information (short form):
.B kitty-launcher -V

.TP
Display version information (long form):
.B kitty-launcher --version

.SH USE CASES

.B Power User Development

For developers managing multiple project environments, kitty-launcher enables instant context
switching between different configurations:

   kitty-launcher -c frontend      # Node.js, npm, JavaScript environment
   kitty-launcher -c backend       # Python, Django, database tools
   kitty-launcher -c devops        # Docker, Kubernetes, deployment tools

Create desktop launchers for each:

   kitty-launcher -l "Frontend" frontend
   kitty-launcher -l "Backend" backend
   kitty-launcher -l "DevOps" devops

Then launch any environment with a single click from your desktop.

.B System Administration

Manage multiple remote environments and tool configurations:

   kitty-launcher -c prod-access      # Production SSH with limited tools
   kitty-launcher -c staging-debug    # Staging with debugging tools
   kitty-launcher -c monitoring       # Log aggregation, metrics, alerts

Quickly switch between environments without manual setup:

   kitty-launcher prod-access    # Instant production terminal

.B KDE Plasma Integration

Combine with KDE Plasma's folder view for cascading menu navigation:

1. Create launcher files: kitty-launcher -l "Project Name" session-name
2. Add folder view widget to desktop pointing to ~/.local/share/applications
3. Hover over folder icon → see all launchers
4. Click any launcher → terminal opens with that environment

This provides instant visual access to all configured environments.

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.TP
.B HOME
Used to determine the user's home directory for finding configuration files.
If not set, the program will fail to locate user-specific configuration directories.

.TP
.B KITTY_CONF_DIR
Set by kitty-launcher to point to the directory containing the selected session
configuration file. This environment variable is used by the kitty terminal to
locate its configuration.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ./kitty/sessions/
Current directory session configurations (highest priority for project-local sessions)

.TP
.B ~/.local/etc/kitty/sessions/
User session configurations (created with \-\-create option)

.TP
.B ~/.local/etc/kitty/launchers/
Launcher .desktop files (created with \-\-create-launcher option)

.TP
.B /opt/etc/kitty/sessions/
Optional system-wide session configurations

.TP
.B ~/.config/kitty/
Kitty standard configuration directory (lowest priority)

.SH NOTES
.IP • 3
All session configuration files should have the
.B .session
extension. However, due to the extension auto-appending feature, you can omit
the extension when launching sessions.

.IP • 3
The program performs comprehensive input validation to prevent path traversal
attacks and shell injection vulnerabilities.

.IP • 3
Session names are case-sensitive on Unix-like systems.

.IP • 3
The program maintains backward compatibility with existing session configurations.

.SH SEE ALSO
.B kitty(1)
\- The kitty terminal emulator documentation

.BR https://sw.kovidgoyal.net/kitty/conf/ " \- Kitty configuration reference"

.BR https://github.com/pilakkat1964/kitty-launcher " \- Project repository"

.SH AUTHOR
Created as a learning vehicle for Rust programming language.

.SH LICENSE
MIT License

.SH REPORTING BUGS
For bug reports and feature requests, visit:
https://github.com/pilakkat1964/kitty-launcher/issues
